Write new basic forms article for learn (#37776)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn_web_development/core/structuring_content/html_forms/index.md

{{PreviousMenuNext("Learn_web_development/Core/Structuring_content/Planet_data_table", "Learn_web_development/Core/Structuring_content/Debugging_HTML", "Learn_web_development/Core/Structuring_content")}}

HTML forms and buttons are powerful tools for interacting with a website's users. Most commonly, they provide users with controls to manipulate a user interface (UI) or input data when required.

> In this article we provide an introduction to the basics of forms and buttons. There is a lot more know — a lot of input types and form features are not mentioned here — but this will give you what you need to know at this stage. The advanced/specialized cases can be studied on a need-to-know basis, as part of the constant learning you'll experience throughout your career.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we provide an introduction to the basics of forms and buttons. There is a lot more to know — a lot of input types and form features are not mentioned — but this article will give you a solid foundation for most cases. You can learn the advanced or specialized uses on a need-to-know basis as part of the constant learning you'll do throughout your career.
```

  - The form control element allows the user to choose or enter some data, which will be sent to the server when the form is submitted.
  - The `<label>` element provides an identifying label associated with the form control describing the data that should be entered into it.
- A {{htmlelement("button")}} element, used to submit the form.

Let's look at a basic example that includes the above three items. This form could be used to ask for a user's name and email, to sign them up for a newsletter (don't worry — it isn't connected to any server, so currently won't do anything).

```html live-sample___form-anatomy
<form action="./submit_page" method="get">
  <h2>Subscribe to our newsletter</h2>
  <p>
    <label for="name">Name (required):</label>
    <input type="text" name="name" id="name" required />
  </p>
  <p>
    <label for="email">Email (required):</label>
    <input type="email" name="email" id="email" required />
  </p>
  <p>
    <button>Sign me up!</button>
  </p>
</form>
```

This is rendered as follows:

{{EmbedLiveSample("form-anatomy", "100%", "200")}}

> Because of the way MDN works, you can enter text into the input fields, but you won't see the form submit properly when you press the button. Before following along with the next few sections, open our [Form anatomy example](#) in a separate browser tab.

Reviewer: The link doesn't go anywhere, but minor suggestion for something like this:

```suggestion
Because of the way MDN works, you can enter text into the input fields, but you won't see the form submit properly when you press the button. To follow along with the next sections, copy the HTML code above into a new HTML file and open it in a browser tab.
```

Author: I've not created the separate examples yet, as I wanted to get your opinion on the code first. In any case, making it so they are not needed at all is even better. I think you are right that we can expect the reader to copy it into an HTML file and open it locally at this stage. I'll merge this change and then read through the article to make sure it all still makes sense.

### The `<form>` element

As we said earlier, the {{htmlelement("form")}} element acts as the outer wrapper for the form, grouping together all the form controls inside it. When the `<button>` is pressed, all the data represented by the from controls will be submitted to the server. The `<form>` element can take many attributes, but the two most important ones, which we've included here, are as follows:

> - `action`: Contains a path to the page that we want to send the submitted form data to, to be processed. Later on, after you submit the form, you'll see `/submit_page` included in the URL. You'll also get a 404 error because the page doesn't actually exist, but that's fine for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `action`: Contains a path to the page that we want to send the submitted form data to, to be processed. Later on, after you submit the form, you'll see `/submit_page` included in the URL. You'll also get a {{HTTPStatus("404")}} error response because the page doesn't actually exist, but that's fine for now.
```

In our example, we've included a [heading element](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/Heading_Elements) (`<h2>`) to describe the purpose of the form.

We've also put each input/label pair and the submit button inside a separate {{htmlelement("p")}}, so that each will appear on a separate line. These elements are all inline by default, meaning that if we didn't do this, they would all sit on the same line.

This is a common pattern for form structuring. Some people use `<p>` elements to separate out their form elements, some use {{htmlelement("div")}}, {{htmlelement("section")}}, or even {{htmlelement("li")}} elements. It doesn't matter a great deal, as long as the elements used make semantic sense. For example, it makes sense to divide form element groups up into separate paragraphs or sections of content, or even items in a list. It would make less sense to represent them as [blockquotes](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/blockquote), [asides](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/aside), or [addresses](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/address).

> There is a specialized element for grouping form elements together called {{htmlelement("fieldset")}}. This is useful only in certain circumstances, such as in complex forms, and when grouping together multiple checkboxes and radio buttons. We'll look at a couple of examples of this later on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a specialized element for grouping form elements together called {{htmlelement("fieldset")}}. This is useful in certain circumstances, such as in complex forms, and when grouping together multiple checkboxes and radio buttons. We'll look at a couple of examples of this later on.
```

### `<input>` elements

The {{htmlelement("input")}} elements represent the different data items entered into the form. Let's study one of the examples from our basic form:

```html
<input type="text" name="name" id="name" required />
```

The attributes are as follows:

> - `type`: Specifies the type of form control to create. There are many different types of from controls, from simple text fields of different types to radio buttons, checkboxes, and more. Type `text"` renders a basic text field that can accept any value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `type`: Specifies the type of form control to create. There are many different types of from controls, from simple text fields of different types to radio buttons, checkboxes, and more. Type `text` renders a basic text field that can accept any value.
```

#### Specialized text field inputs

The second exercise above raises an interesting point. The second input field specifically expects an email address, and validates entered values as such. If you look at the form code again, you'll see why — the second `<input>` has a `type` of `email`. There are several specialized text field input types designed to handle specific types of data — [`<input type="number">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/number), [`<input type="password">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/password), [`<input type="tel">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/tel), etc.

> [!CALLOUT]
>
> **Try it out**
>
> Follow some of the links above to find out what these input types are used for. Have a look around our [`<input>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input) reference and see if you can find any more specialized text field input types.

### `<label>` elements

> As we said above, {{htmlelement("label")}} element provide identifying labels associated with the form controls that describe the data that should be entered into them. You can put whatever text content you like in `<label>` elements, but they should accurately describe what data the associated form control expects. The association is created by giving the form control an `id` attribute, then giving the `<label>` element a `for` attribute with the same value as the control's `id`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we said above, {{htmlelement("label")}} elements provide identifying labels associated with the form controls that describe the data that should be entered into them. You can put whatever text content you like in `<label>` elements, but they should accurately describe what data the associated form control expects. The association is created by giving the form control an `id` attribute, then giving the `<label>` element a `for` attribute with the same value as the control's `id`.
```

- When visually impaired users use a screen reader to help them read and interact with web page content, the screen reader will read out the associated label text when each control is encountered, making it easier for them to understand what content should be entered into each one.
- It enables you to focus the form element by clicking on the label text as well as the control itself. This is especially useful for mobile phone users, where it can be difficult to accurately select a form element with your finger on a touch screen. Making the **hit area** larger is useful in such circumstances.

#### Explicit and implicit form labels

The form label style you saw above is called an **explicit form label** — the association between control and label is explicitly made via the `id` and `for` attributes. You can also implement an **implicit form label** by nesting the control inside the label, like this:

```html
<label>
  Name (required):
  <input type="text" name="name" required />
</label>
```

The nesting makes an implicit association between control and label, and you no longer need the `id` and `for` attributes.

> Either approach is OK, but we'd recommend using the explicit labelling approach. This is because we feel that the explicit association is easier to identify and understand, especially as your HTML code gets more complex. In addition, screen readers (and other assistive technologies) don't all handle implicit labels correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Either approach is OK, but we'd recommend using the explicit labeling approach. This is because the explicit association is usually easier to identify and understand, especially as your HTML code gets more complex. In addition, screen readers (and other assistive technologies) don't all handle implicit labels correctly.
```

> You can read more about form labelling best practices in [HTML Inputs and Labels: A Love Story](https://css-tricks.com/html-inputs-and-labels-a-love-story/), csstricks.com (2021).

Reviewer: I think "labelling" will get flagged (🇬🇧/🇺🇸) to "labeling" by the spellchecker:

```suggestion
You can read more about form labeling best practices in [HTML Inputs and Labels: A Love Story](https://css-tricks.com/html-inputs-and-labels-a-love-story/), csstricks.com (2021).
```

```html-nolint
<label for="comments">Any other comments:</label>
<textarea id="comments" name="comments" rows="5" cols="33"></textarea>
```

They behave in the same way as `<input type="text">` elements, except that they allow multiple lines of text to be entered. The `rows` attribute specifies the number of rows tall the text area will be by default, while the `colss` attribute specifies the number of columns wide the text area will be by default. If they are not specified, the values used are `cols="20"` and `rows="2"`.

> [!CALLOUT]
>
> **Try it out**
>
> Most browsers render text areas with a drag handle in one corner, which can be used to resize it. Try using this to resize the text area in our demo.

## Form validation

Earlier on, we looked at some of the basic client-side form validation provided by the browser — using the `required` attribute to specify that a field must be filled out before the form can be submitted and check the correct value type for specific value types like email addresses, URLs, numbers, etc. Validation is important for two main reasons:

- making sure that data is submitted in the correct format so that it doesn't cause errors in your application.

> - making sure data does not cause security problems. Bad people know how to submit data formatte specifically so that it, for example, can execute commands to delete databases or take control of a system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- making sure data does not cause security problems. Bad people know how to submit data formatted specifically so that it, for example, can execute commands to delete databases or take control of a system.
```

Author: I fixed this one in my last commit; thanks anyway ;-)

Form validation is a huge topic that is beyond scope for this article, so we will leave it here for now. For now, bear in mind that there are two types of form validation:

- Client-side validation, which happens in the browser, implemented using a combination of form validation attributes (like `required`) and JavaScript. Client-side validation is useful for giving users instant hints when they entered the wrong data, but is no so effective at stopping malicious data from getting through. It is too easy to turn off JavaScript or alter client-side code so that the validation no longer works.

> - Server-side validation, which happens on the server, implemented using whatever language the server is using. Server-side validation is great for stopping malicious code, as it can't be tampered with easily. It is not so good at giving users hints about incorrect data as the data has to go to the server, get validated, and then the result sent back to the client before the user can be notified.

Reviewer: bit wordy, but I wanted to note that it can happen accidentally or on purpose that your sever receives weirdly-formatted messages, and the motivation doesn't matter, you shouldn't trust client data (will be in a proper format):

```suggestion
- Server-side validation, which happens on the server in whatever language the server is running. Badly-formed messages can be sent to a server by accident or on purpose. The conventional wisdom is to make sure that your server doesn't trust anything a client is sending to avoid bugs or security issues caused by malformed messages. Server-side validation is great for stopping malicious messages, as it's harder to tamper with the code running on the server. Server-side validation is not so good at giving users hints about incorrect data because the data has to go to the server, get validated, and then the result is sent back to the client before the user can be notified.
```

Author: I think you've got a good point here. I used your text but tweaked it a bit.

          <li>Different button types.</li>
          <li>Common <code>&lt;input&gt;</code> types.</li>
          <li>Common attributes such as <code>name</code> and <code>value</code>.</li>
          <li>The <code>&lt;form&gt;</code> element, and the basics of form submission.</li>
          <li>Making forms accessible with labels and correct semantics.</li>
          <li>Other control types: <code>&lt;textarea&gt;</code>, <code>&lt;select&gt;</code>, and <code>&lt;option&gt;</code>.</li>
          <li>Client-side validation basics.</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Interacting with users

So far in the course, you have seen a couple of ways in which users can interact with the web:

- [Links](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Core/Structuring_content/Creating_links) can be used to navigate to different sections of content, either on the same page or a different page.
- [`<video>` and `<audio>`](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Core/Structuring_content/HTML_video_and_audio) elements generally feature controls such as play/pause, fast forward, rewind, etc., which allow users to consume media content as they wish.

> However, these features tend to faciliate one-way interactions, with users passively consuming content. This is fine, but the web is a two-way experience. Website users set preferences for how they want to experience content and services. They order taxis and request call backs. They provide feedback and make complaints. They buy products and get them delivered to their homes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, these features tend to facilitate one-way interactions, with users passively consuming content. This is fine, but the web is a two-way experience. Website users set preferences for how they want to experience content and services. They order taxis and request call backs. They provide feedback and make complaints. They buy products and get them delivered to their homes.
```

- `action`: Contains a path to the page that we want to send the submitted form data to, to be processed. Later on, after you submit the form, you'll see `/submit_page` included in the URL. You'll also get a {{HTTPStatus("404")}} error response because the page doesn't actually exist, but that's fine for now.
- `method`: Specifies the data transmission [method](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Methods) you want to use for sending the form data to the server. Don't worry about this too much for now; the `get` value causes the data to be sent as parameters attached to the end of the URL.

> [!CALLOUT]
>
> **Try it out**
>
> Go to the example in the separate tab, try entering a name of "Bob" and an email address of "bob@bob.com".
>
> The above two attributes cause the form data to be submitted in a URL along the following lines:
>

> > `/some/url/submit_page?name=Bob&email=bob%40bob.com`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ```plain
> /some/url/submit_page?name=Bob&email=bob%40bob.com
> ```
```

Author: I deliberately didn't put this in an actual code block, because I thought it looked horrible inside thaecallout.

Form validation is a huge topic that is beyond scope for this article, so we will leave it here for now. Just bear in mind that there are two types of form validation:

- Client-side validation, which happens in the browser, implemented using a combination of form validation attributes (like `required`) and JavaScript. Client-side validation is useful for giving users instant hints when they have entered the wrong data, but is not so effective at stopping malicious data from getting through. It is too easy to turn off JavaScript or alter client-side code so that the validation no longer works.
- Server-side validation, which happens on the server, implemented using whatever language the server is using. Server-side validation is great for stopping malicious code, as it can't be tampered with easily. It is not so good at giving users hints about incorrect data as the data has to go to the server, get validated, and then the result sent back to the client before the user can be notified.

> In short, both client-side and server-side validation are needed. If you want to start learning more about validation, a good place to start is [Client-side form validation](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Extensions/Forms/Form_validation).

Reviewer: What do you think?

```suggestion
In short, don't decide between using either client-side or server-side validation - you will need both. You need client-side validation to give users feedback on their input and server-side validation to make sure messages are in a format your server can safely handle. If you want to start learning more about validation, a good place to start is [Client-side form validation](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Extensions/Forms/Form_validation).
```
